.TH rsbackup.cron 1
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Richard Kettlewell
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.SH NAME
rsbackup.cron \- cron script for rsbackup
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsbackup.cron\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFREQUENCY\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrsbackup.cron\fR is invoked from cron to run automated backups, pruning
and reporting.
.PP
\fIFREQUENCY\fR must be one of \fBhourly\fR, \fBdaily\fR, \fBweekly\fR
or \fBmonthly\fR, corresponding to the frequency it is invoked at.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run\fR, \fB-n
Passes the \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR option to \fBrsbackup\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose\fR, \fB-v
Displays the \fBrsbackup\fR command before executing it.
.TP
.B \-\-help\fR, \fB-h
Displays a usage message and terminates.
.TP
.B \-\-version\fR, \fB\-V
Display version string.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from \fI/etc/rsbackup/defaults\fR.
This is a shell script fragment and it should define the following
variables:
.TP
.B backup
Defines the frequency to \fIattempt\fR backups,
i.e. to run \fBrsbackup --backup\fR.
The default is \fBhourly\fR.
.IP
Use backup policies for full control over the actual backup frequency.
.TP
.B report
Defines the frequency to send an email report.
The default is \fBdaily\fR.
.TP
.B email
Defines the destination address for the email report.
.TP
.B prune
Defines the frequency of pruning old backups.
The default is \fBdaily\fR.
.TP
.B prune_incomplete
Defines the frequency of pruning incomplete backups.
The default is \fBdweekly\fR.
.SS Frequencies
The possible frequences are \fBhourly\fR, \fBdaily\fB, \fBweekly\fR or \fBmonthly\fR.
.SS Example
.in +4n
.EX
#
# Set backup=hourly|daily|weekly|monthly to control frequency of
# backup attempts. (Use backup policies for fine-grained control over
# when backups happen.)
#
backup=hourly

#
# Set report=hourly|daily|weekly|monthly to control frequency of
# email reports.  (Hourly is probably a bit much!)  Only effective
# if email is not "".
#
report=daily

#
# Set email=ADDRESS to have the report emailed to that address.
#
email=root

#
# Set prune=hourly|daily|weekly|monthly|never to control frequency of
# automated pruning of old backups
#
prune=daily

#
# Set prune_incomplete=hourly|daily|weekly|monthly|never to control
# frequency of automated pruning of incomplete backups
#
prune_incomplete=weekly

#
# Prefix to the rsbackup command
# Use 'nice' and/or 'ionice' here.  Remember to quote correctly.
#
nicely=
.EE
.in
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrsbackup\fR(1), \fBrsbackup-mount\fR(1), \fBrsbackup\fR(5).
.SH AUTHOR
Richard Kettlewell <rjk@greenend.org.uk>
