.TH rsbackup 1
.\" Copyright (c) 2012, 2014 Richard Kettlewell
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.SH NAME
rsbackup-snapshot-hook \- rsync-based backup utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsbackup-snapshot-hook\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrsbackup-snapshot-hook\fR creates and removes LVM snapshots when
configured as a pre- or post-backup-hook for \fBrsbackup\fR(1).
.PP
Snapshots will only be created for volumes that have a corresponding
directory in the snapshot directory.
For instance, a snapshot will be created for the volume \fBroot\fR if
\fI/snap/root\fR exists.
(Use the \fB\-\-snaps\fR option to change the snapshot directory.)
Such volumes must be stored in a logical volume.
.PP
Leftover snapshots are always unmounted and removed before creation.
.PP
Snapshots are given only a fraction of the size of the original volume.
Use the \fB\-\-divisor\fR to change this.
.PP
After creation snapshots are fsck'd and mounted.
If an error occurs in any part of the creation process, the partially
snapshot created snapshot may be left in place (and ultimately be torn
down when the post-backup-hook is run).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-snaps\fR, \fB\-s\fI PATH
Set the path to the snapshot directory.
The default is \fI/snap\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-divisor\fR, \fB\-d\fI DIVISOR
Set the snapshot size ratio.
The default is 5.
.TP
.B \-\-help\fR, \fB\-h
Display usage message.
.TP
.B \-\-version\fR, \fB\-V
Display version string.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrsbackup\fR(1), \fBlvm\fR(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Richard Kettlewell <rjk@greenend.org.uk>
