.TH rsbackup-graph 1
.\" Copyright (c) 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015 Richard Kettlewell
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.SH NAME
rsbackup-graph \- graphical representation of rsbackup state
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsbackup\-graph\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR] [\fISELECTOR\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrsbackup\-graph\fR generates a graphical representation of the current set of backups known to \fBrsbackup\fR.
.PP
For configuration options which affect this program, see the section
\fBGraph Directives\fR in \fBrsbackup\fR(5).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-config \fIPATH\fR, \fB\-c \fIPATH
The path to the configuration file.
The default is
.IR /etc/rsbackup/config .
.TP
.B \-\-database\fR, \fB\-D \fIPATH
Override the path to the backup database.
.TP
.B \-\-output\fR, \fB\-o \fIPATH
Set the output path.
To write to standard output, use \fB\-o -\fR.
The default is \fIrsbackup.png\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-fonts\fR, \fB-F
Lists the known font families to standard output.
.TP
.B \-\-help\fR, \fB\-h
Display a usage message.
.TP
.B \-\-version\fR, \fB\-V
Display the version number.
.SS "Volume Selection"
The list of selectors on the command line determines what subset of
the known volumes are displayed.
The following selectors are possible:
.TP 16
.I HOST
Select all volumes for the host.
.TP
.IR HOST : VOLUME
Select the volume.
.TP
.BI \- HOST
Deselect all volumes for the host.
.TP
.BI \- HOST : VOLUME
Deselect the volume.
.TP
.B *
Select all volumes.
.PP
If no hosts or volumes are specified on the command line then all volumes are
selected for display.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrsbackup\fR(1),
\fBrsbackup.cron\fR(1),
\fBrsbackup\-mount\fR(1),
\fBrsbackup\-snapshot\-hook\fR(1),
\fBrsync\fR(1),
\fBrsbackup\fR(5)
.SH AUTHOR
Richard Kettlewell <rjk@greenend.org.uk>
