.TH rsbackup-mount 1
.\" Copyright (c) 2011, 2012, 2014 Richard Kettlewell
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.SH NAME
rsbackup-mount \- mount encrypted or unencrypted disks used by rsbackup
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsbackup-mount\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR] [\fIDEVICES\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrsbackup-mount\fR mounts and unmounts encrypted or unencrypted
partitions used as backup stores by \fBrsbackup\fR(1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-unmount\fR, \fB\-u
Unmount devices.
(The default is to mount devices.)
.TP
.B \-\-check\fR, \fB\-c
Check for available devices that aren't open.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run\fR, \fB\-n
Do nothing, instead print the commands that would be executed.
.TP
.B \-\-key\-file \fIPATH\fR, \fB\-k \fIPATH
Pass the argument \fB\-\-key\-file\fR \fIPATH\fR to \fBcryptsetup\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-help\fR, \fB\-h
Display usage message.
.TP
.B \-\-version\fR, \fB\-V
Display version string.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from \fI/etc/rsbackup/devices\fR.
This is a shell script fragment.
It should set \fBdevices\fR to a (space-separated) list of device
names and for each device name \fID\fR, define \fID\fR\fB_uuid\fR to
its UUID.
To specify that a device is unencrypted (i.e. that it just
requires mounting or unmounting), define \fID\fR\fB_plain\fR as a
non-empty string for that device.
(Have a look in \fI/dev/disk/by-uuid\fR to find device UUIDs).
.SS Example
.in +4n
.EX
# List names of devices here
devices="backup3 backup4"

# For each device, define DEVICE_uuid
# e.g. devicename_uuid=8f4171f0-007d-4083-a40c-407e5f9c24dd
backup3_uuid=8f4171f0-007d-4083-a40c-407e5f9c24dd
backup4_uuid=80a1ca0d-d07a-4195-9da1-8cbb9fbc11b9

# For any device that isn't encrypted, define DEVICE_plain
# e.g. devicename_plain=1
backup3_plain=1
.EE
.in
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrsbackup\fR(1), \fBrsbackup.cron\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Richard Kettlewell <rjk@greenend.org.uk>
